doc/en/user/source/community/backuprestore/usagerest.rst, before:

.. _backup_restore_usagerest:

Usage Via GeoServer's REST API
==============================

The Backup and Restore REST api consists of a few resources meant to used in an asynchronous fashion:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Resource
     - Method
     - Parameters and Notes
   * - /rest/br/backup/
     - POST
     - Post a JSON/XML document with the backup parameters, see below
   * - /rest/br/backup/backupId
     - GET
     - Returns a json/xml representation of the backup operation. See below
   * - /rest/br/backup/backupId
     - DELETE
     - Cancels the backup operation
   * - /rest/br/restore
     - POST
     - Post a JSON/XML document with the restore parameters, see below
   * - /rest/br/restore/restoreId
     - GET
     - Returns a json/xml representation of the backup operation, see below
   * - /rest/br/restore/restoreId
     - DELETE
     - Cancels the restore operation

Usage Example
-------------

We are going to use the command line tool cURL to send HTTP REST requests to GeoServer.

The ``/rest/br/backup/`` and ``/rest/br/restore`` endpoints accept an optional format suffix that allows the Backup / Restore archive to be streamed to / from the client instead of being written on / read from the file system.

**Initiate a Backup**

Prepare a file containing with a JSON object representing the Backup procedure configuration.

    ``backup_post.json`` ::

        {
           "backup":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "overwrite":true,
              "options":{
              }
           }
        }

In this case we did not specify any options in the backup configuration so default values will be used.

Available options are:

#. ``BK_BEST_EFFORT``: Skip any failing resources and proceed with the backup procedure

Also an optional ``Filter`` can be passed to restrict the scope of the restore operation to a list of workspaces. 

    For example ::

        {
           "backup":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
        "overwrite":true,
              "options":{
                "option": ["BK_BEST_EFFORT=true"] 
              },
        "filter": "name IN ('topp','geosolutions-it')"
           }
        }

Backup procedure will be initiated. 

    Here is a sample response ::

        HTTP/1.1 201 Created
        Date: Mon, 01 Aug 2016 14:35:44 GMT
        Location: http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1
        Server: Noelios-Restlet-Engine/1.0..8
        Content-Type: application/json
        Transfer-Encoding: chunked

        {
           "backup":{
              "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
              "execution":{
                 "id":1,
                 "version":1,
                 "stepExecutions":{
                    "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet"
                 },
                 "status":[
                    "STARTED"
                 ],
                 "startTime":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.802 UTC",
                 "createTime":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.798 UTC",
                 "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.803 UTC",
                 "exitStatus":{
                    "exitCode":"UNKNOWN",
                    "exitDescription":""
                 },
                 "progress":"1\/9"
              },
              "options":{
                 "@class":"synchList",
                 "option":[
                    "OVERWRITE=true"
                 ]
              },
              "warningsList":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "archiveFile":{
                 "@class":"resource",
                 "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
              },
              "overwrite":true
           }
        }

At the end of the backup procedure you'll be able to download the generated archive to your local file system by making an HTTP GET request to the same endpoint, using the **backup ID** as above and adding the ``.zip`` at the end

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -X GET  "http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.zip" -o 1.zip
        
.. figure:: images/usagerest001.png
   :align: center


**Query status of Backup executions**

Status of the operation can be queried making an HTTP GET request to the location listed in the response, 

    ``http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/$ID.{json/xml}``

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the backup operation you'd like to inspect.

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.json

or

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.xml

GeoServer will respond with the status of the backup job corresponding to that ID

.. figure:: images/usagerest002.png
   :align: center

.. figure:: images/usagerest003.png
   :align: center

Here you are able to see the status of all the steps involved in the backup procedure with creation time, start time, end time, exit status etc.


**Cancel a Backup**

Cancel an in progress Backup by sending an HTTP DELETE request with the ID of the task

    ::
    
        curl -v -XDELETE -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/$ID

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the backup operation you'd like to cancel.


**Initiate a Restore**

Prepare a file with a JSON object representing the Restore procedure configuration

    ``restore_post.json`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "options":{
              }
           }
        }

In this case we did not specify any options in the restore configuration so default values will be used.

Available Options are:

#. ``BK_DRY_RUN``: Only test the archive do not persist the restored configuration

#. ``BK_BEST_EFFORT``: Skip any failing resources and proceed with the restore procedure

Also an optional ``Filter`` can be passed to restict the scope of the restore operation to a list of workspaces.

    For example ::
    
        {
           "restore":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "options":{
                "option": ["BK_DRY_RUN=true"] 
              },
        "filter": "name IN ('topp','geosolutions-it')"
           }
        }

If ``archiveFile`` is specified, the archive specified on that path of the remote file system will be used to initiate the restore procedure. 
Otherwise you're the archive needs to be uploaded  from your local system.

Then make a POST HTTP request to GeoServer's REST interface endpoint for the restore procedure

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -H "Content-Type: application/json" -X POST --data @restore_post.json http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/

Restore procedure will be initiated. 

    Here is a sample response ::

        HTTP/1.1 201 Created
        Date: Mon, 01 Aug 2016 15:07:29 GMT
        Location: http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/2
        Server: Noelios-Restlet-Engine/1.0..8
        Content-Type: application/json
        Transfer-Encoding: chunked

        {
           "restore":{
              "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
              "execution":{
                 "id":2,
                 "version":1,
                 "stepExecutions":{
                    "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet"
                 },
                 "status":[
                    "STARTED"
                 ],
                 "startTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                 "createTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.393 UTC",
                 "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                 "exitStatus":{
                    "exitCode":"UNKNOWN",
                    "exitDescription":""
                 },
                 "progress":"0\/9"
              },
              "options":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "warningsList":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "archiveFile":{
                 "@class":"resource",
                 "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
              }
           }
        }

.. figure:: images/usagerest004.png
   :align: center

To upload the archive from our local system instead, omit the archiveFile parameter in the JSON object and pass the ``--upload-file`` parameter to cURL:

    ``restore_post.json`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "options":{
              },
           }
        }

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -H "Content-Type: application/json" --upload-file "archive_to_restore.zip" -X POST --data @restore_post.json http://localhost:8081/geoserver/rest/br/restore/

Local ``archive_to_restore.zip`` archive  will be uploaded and used by the restore procedure.

.. figure:: images/usagerest005.png
   :align: center
   
Query for status of Restore operations

    ``http://mygeoserver/geoser/restore/$ID.{json/xml}`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "execution":{
                 "hash":2,
                 "key":{
                    "@class":"long",
                    "$":"2"
                 },
                 "val":{
                    "@class":"restore",
                    "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
                    "execution":{
                       "id":2,
                       "version":2,
                       "stepExecutions":{
                          "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet",
                          "step":[
                             {
                                "name":"restoreNamespaceInfos",
                                "status":"COMPLETED",
                                "exitStatus":{
                                   "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                                   "exitDescription":""
                                },
                                "startTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "endTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "lastUpdated":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "parameters":{
                                   "input.file.path":"file:\/\/\/opt\/tomcat-geoserver-2.9.x\/temp\/tmpbbe2388a-f26d-4f26-a20f-88c653d88aec",
                                   "time":1470064049392
                                },
                                "readCount":1,
                                "writeCount":1,
                                "failureExceptions":""
                             },
                            ...
                             {
                                "name":"restoreGeoServerSecurityManager",
                                "status":"COMPLETED",
                                "exitStatus":{
                                   "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                                   "exitDescription":""
                                },
                                "startTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "endTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "lastUpdated":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "parameters":{
                                   "input.file.path":"file:\/\/\/opt\/tomcat-geoserver-2.9.x\/temp\/tmpbbe2388a-f26d-4f26-a20f-88c653d88aec",
                                   "time":1470064049392
                                },
                                "readCount":0,
                                "writeCount":0,
                                "failureExceptions":""
                             }
                          ]
                       },
                       "status":"COMPLETED",
                       "startTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                       "createTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.393 UTC",
                       "endTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:30.356 UTC",
                       "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 15:07:30.772 UTC",
                       "exitStatus":{
                          "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                          "exitDescription":""
                       },
                       "progress":"9\/9"
                    },
                    "options":{
                       "@class":"synchList"
                    },
                    "warningsList":{
                       "@class":"synchList"
                    },
                    "archiveFile":{
                       "@class":"resource",
                       "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
                    }
                 }
              }
            ...

Here you are able to see the status of all the steps involved in the restore procedure with creation time, start time, end time, exit status etc.


**Cancel a Restore**

Cancel an in progress Restore by sending an HTTP DELETE request:

    ::
    
        curl -v -XDELETE -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/$ID

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the restore operation you'd like to cancel.

Commit message:

- Move the catalog reload/reset to a final Spring batch step. This ensures the backup only reports as complete when the catalog has actually been reloaded. - Add the experimental ability to skip certain settings on backup and restore. - Add the ability to skip deleting some items when restoring, particularly existing worksapces. - Add the ability to use a Map instead of Hints when calling Backup/Restore. This makes it easier to add new parameters.

doc/en/user/source/community/backuprestore/usagerest.rst, after:

.. _backup_restore_usagerest:

Usage Via GeoServer's REST API
==============================

The Backup and Restore REST api consists of a few resources meant to used in an asynchronous fashion:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Resource
     - Method
     - Parameters and Notes
   * - /rest/br/backup/
     - POST
     - Post a JSON/XML document with the backup parameters, see below
   * - /rest/br/backup/backupId
     - GET
     - Returns a json/xml representation of the backup operation. See below
   * - /rest/br/backup/backupId
     - DELETE
     - Cancels the backup operation
   * - /rest/br/restore
     - POST
     - Post a JSON/XML document with the restore parameters, see below
   * - /rest/br/restore/restoreId
     - GET
     - Returns a json/xml representation of the backup operation, see below
   * - /rest/br/restore/restoreId
     - DELETE
     - Cancels the restore operation

Usage Example
-------------

We are going to use the command line tool cURL to send HTTP REST requests to GeoServer.

The ``/rest/br/backup/`` and ``/rest/br/restore`` endpoints accept an optional format suffix that allows the Backup / Restore archive to be streamed to / from the client instead of being written on / read from the file system.

**Initiate a Backup**

Prepare a file containing with a JSON object representing the Backup procedure configuration.

    ``backup_post.json`` ::

        {
           "backup":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "overwrite":true,
              "options":{
              }
           }
        }

In this case we did not specify any options in the backup configuration so default values will be used.

Available options are:

#. ``BK_BEST_EFFORT``: Skip any failing resources and proceed with the backup procedure

#. ``BK_PARAM_PASSWORDS``: Whether outgoing store passwords should be parameterized in the backup. With this option set
   all store passwords will be replaced with a token that looks like `${workspaceName:storeName.passwd.encryptedValue}`

#. ``BK_SKIP_SECURITY``: _Experimental_. This will exclude security settings from the backup.

#. ``BK_SKIP_SETTINGS``: _Experimental_. This will attempt to exclude most global settings from the backup, as well as
   security settings.

Also an optional ``Filter`` can be passed to restrict the scope of the restore operation to a list of workspaces. 

    For example ::

        {
           "backup":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
        "overwrite":true,
              "options":{
                "option": ["BK_BEST_EFFORT=true"] 
              },
        "filter": "name IN ('topp','geosolutions-it')"
           }
        }

Backup procedure will be initiated. 

    Here is a sample response ::

        HTTP/1.1 201 Created
        Date: Mon, 01 Aug 2016 14:35:44 GMT
        Location: http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1
        Server: Noelios-Restlet-Engine/1.0..8
        Content-Type: application/json
        Transfer-Encoding: chunked

        {
           "backup":{
              "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
              "execution":{
                 "id":1,
                 "version":1,
                 "stepExecutions":{
                    "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet"
                 },
                 "status":[
                    "STARTED"
                 ],
                 "startTime":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.802 UTC",
                 "createTime":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.798 UTC",
                 "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 14:35:44.803 UTC",
                 "exitStatus":{
                    "exitCode":"UNKNOWN",
                    "exitDescription":""
                 },
                 "progress":"1\/9"
              },
              "options":{
                 "@class":"synchList",
                 "option":[
                    "OVERWRITE=true"
                 ]
              },
              "warningsList":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "archiveFile":{
                 "@class":"resource",
                 "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
              },
              "overwrite":true
           }
        }

At the end of the backup procedure you'll be able to download the generated archive to your local file system by making an HTTP GET request to the same endpoint, using the **backup ID** as above and adding the ``.zip`` at the end

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -X GET  "http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.zip" -o 1.zip
        
.. figure:: images/usagerest001.png
   :align: center


**Query status of Backup executions**

Status of the operation can be queried making an HTTP GET request to the location listed in the response, 

    ``http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/$ID.{json/xml}``

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the backup operation you'd like to inspect.

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.json

or

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/1.xml

GeoServer will respond with the status of the backup job corresponding to that ID

.. figure:: images/usagerest002.png
   :align: center

.. figure:: images/usagerest003.png
   :align: center

Here you are able to see the status of all the steps involved in the backup procedure with creation time, start time, end time, exit status etc.


**Cancel a Backup**

Cancel an in progress Backup by sending an HTTP DELETE request with the ID of the task

    ::
    
        curl -v -XDELETE -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/backup/$ID

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the backup operation you'd like to cancel.


**Initiate a Restore**

Prepare a file with a JSON object representing the Restore procedure configuration

    ``restore_post.json`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "options":{
              }
           }
        }

In this case we did not specify any options in the restore configuration so default values will be used.

Available Options are:

#. ``BK_DRY_RUN``: Only test the archive do not persist the restored configuration

#. ``BK_BEST_EFFORT``: Skip any failing resources and proceed with the restore procedure

#. ``BK_PASSWORD_TOKENS``: A comma separated list of equal sign separated key/values to be replaced in data store passwords
   in an incoming backup. For example ::

       BK_PASSWORD_TOKENS=${workspace:store1.passwd.encryptedValye}=foo,${workspace:store2.passwd.encryptedValue}=bar

#. ``BK_SKIP_SECURITY``: _Experimental_. This will exclude security settings from the restore. Default: `false`.

#. ``BK_SKIP_SETTINGS``: _Experimental_. This will attempt to exclude most global settings from the backup, as well as
   security settings. Default: `false`

#. ``BK_PURGE_RESOURCES``: _Experimental_. This will skip deleting incoming resources where possible. In particular,
existing workspaces will not be deleted during the restore. Default: `true`

Also an optional ``Filter`` can be passed to restict the scope of the restore operation to a list of workspaces.

    For example ::
    
        {
           "restore":{
              "archiveFile":"/home/sg/BackupAndRestore/test_rest_1.zip",
              "options":{
                "option": ["BK_DRY_RUN=true"] 
              },
        "filter": "name IN ('topp','geosolutions-it')"
           }
        }

If ``archiveFile`` is specified, the archive specified on that path of the remote file system will be used to initiate the restore procedure. 
Otherwise you're the archive needs to be uploaded  from your local system.

Then make a POST HTTP request to GeoServer's REST interface endpoint for the restore procedure

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -H "Content-Type: application/json" -X POST --data @restore_post.json http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/

Restore procedure will be initiated. 

    Here is a sample response ::

        HTTP/1.1 201 Created
        Date: Mon, 01 Aug 2016 15:07:29 GMT
        Location: http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/2
        Server: Noelios-Restlet-Engine/1.0..8
        Content-Type: application/json
        Transfer-Encoding: chunked

        {
           "restore":{
              "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
              "execution":{
                 "id":2,
                 "version":1,
                 "stepExecutions":{
                    "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet"
                 },
                 "status":[
                    "STARTED"
                 ],
                 "startTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                 "createTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.393 UTC",
                 "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                 "exitStatus":{
                    "exitCode":"UNKNOWN",
                    "exitDescription":""
                 },
                 "progress":"0\/9"
              },
              "options":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "warningsList":{
                 "@class":"synchList"
              },
              "archiveFile":{
                 "@class":"resource",
                 "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
              }
           }
        }

.. figure:: images/usagerest004.png
   :align: center

To upload the archive from our local system instead, omit the archiveFile parameter in the JSON object and pass the ``--upload-file`` parameter to cURL:

    ``restore_post.json`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "options":{
              },
           }
        }

    ::
    
        curl -u "admin:geoserver" -i -H "Content-Type: application/json" --upload-file "archive_to_restore.zip" -X POST --data @restore_post.json http://localhost:8081/geoserver/rest/br/restore/

Local ``archive_to_restore.zip`` archive  will be uploaded and used by the restore procedure.

.. figure:: images/usagerest005.png
   :align: center
   
Query for status of Restore operations

    ``http://mygeoserver/geoser/restore/$ID.{json/xml}`` ::

        {
           "restore":{
              "execution":{
                 "hash":2,
                 "key":{
                    "@class":"long",
                    "$":"2"
                 },
                 "val":{
                    "@class":"restore",
                    "totalNumberOfSteps":9,
                    "execution":{
                       "id":2,
                       "version":2,
                       "stepExecutions":{
                          "@class":"java.util.concurrent.CopyOnWriteArraySet",
                          "step":[
                             {
                                "name":"restoreNamespaceInfos",
                                "status":"COMPLETED",
                                "exitStatus":{
                                   "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                                   "exitDescription":""
                                },
                                "startTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "endTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "lastUpdated":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "parameters":{
                                   "input.file.path":"file:\/\/\/opt\/tomcat-geoserver-2.9.x\/temp\/tmpbbe2388a-f26d-4f26-a20f-88c653d88aec",
                                   "time":1470064049392
                                },
                                "readCount":1,
                                "writeCount":1,
                                "failureExceptions":""
                             },
                            ...
                             {
                                "name":"restoreGeoServerSecurityManager",
                                "status":"COMPLETED",
                                "exitStatus":{
                                   "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                                   "exitDescription":""
                                },
                                "startTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "endTime":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "lastUpdated":"8\/1\/16 3:07 PM",
                                "parameters":{
                                   "input.file.path":"file:\/\/\/opt\/tomcat-geoserver-2.9.x\/temp\/tmpbbe2388a-f26d-4f26-a20f-88c653d88aec",
                                   "time":1470064049392
                                },
                                "readCount":0,
                                "writeCount":0,
                                "failureExceptions":""
                             }
                          ]
                       },
                       "status":"COMPLETED",
                       "startTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.398 UTC",
                       "createTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:29.393 UTC",
                       "endTime":"2016-08-01 15:07:30.356 UTC",
                       "lastUpdated":"2016-08-01 15:07:30.772 UTC",
                       "exitStatus":{
                          "exitCode":"COMPLETED",
                          "exitDescription":""
                       },
                       "progress":"9\/9"
                    },
                    "options":{
                       "@class":"synchList"
                    },
                    "warningsList":{
                       "@class":"synchList"
                    },
                    "archiveFile":{
                       "@class":"resource",
                       "$":"\/home\/sg\/BackupAndRestore\/test_rest_1.zip"
                    }
                 }
              }
            ...

Here you are able to see the status of all the steps involved in the restore procedure with creation time, start time, end time, exit status etc.


**Cancel a Restore**

Cancel an in progress Restore by sending an HTTP DELETE request:

    ::
    
        curl -v -XDELETE -u "admin:geoserver" http://mygeoserver/geoserver/rest/br/restore/$ID

Replace ``$ID`` with the **ID** of the restore operation you'd like to cancel.
